Add sequential workshop tutorial format (pick-and-place seed) (#5104)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/pick-and-place/05-perception-guided-picking.md

Add a `print(obj_in_world.pose)` after the transform and run the script. Watch the x, y, and z values it prints as you move a block around the table.

{{< checkpoint >}}
`obj_in_world.pose` prints coordinates that make physical sense: a `z` roughly at the table surface plus the block's height, and `x`/`y` values that land somewhere over the table rather than off in empty space or underneath it. If the numbers look physically wrong, the most common cause is a detection that was not taken from `home-pose`. Confirm the guard clause runs before every `get_object_point_clouds` call.
{{< /checkpoint >}}

> ## Compute the approach and grasp poses

Reviewer: consider renaming this section to "The motion service" or similar, and create a section called Compute the approach and grasp poses lower down, add a paragraph or two explaining the motion service here and show an example motion.move command, then have the Compute the approach and grasp poses section afterwards, intro the changes to approach and grasp briefly and remind the learner what the goal is, then have the ascii diagram with the offset, as it feels orphaned being so far from approach and grasp poses

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-approach-grasp-offsets (DIAGRAM): block center; approach = +100mm; grasp = TCP one gripper-length (60mm) above; gripper-1 TCP vs arm end -->

```text
Offsets applied to obj_in_world.pose (the block center). They move the
gripper-1 TCP, not the arm's end frame:

  +100 mm  ── approach pose  (APPROACH_MM): standoff above the block
        │
        │  descend
        ▼
   +60 mm  ── grasp pose     (GRIPPER_LENGTH_MM): the gripper-1 TCP,
        │                     one gripper-length above the fingertips
        │  fingers close here
        ▼
     0 mm  ── block center   (obj_in_world.pose)
```

The pick uses the **motion service**: it plans a collision-free path to a Cartesian (coordinates in 3D space) goal. Unlike the vision service, you never configured it. The motion service is one of a handful of services the RDK builds into `viam-server` itself, so it is present on every machine under the reserved name `builtin`. Uncomment its handle in the script, the same way you uncommented the vision handle earlier in this phase:

```python
motion = MotionClient.from_robot(machine, "builtin")
```

> Passing `"builtin"` to `MotionClient.from_robot` reaches that default motion service; there is no motion component on the **CONFIGURE** tab to point at, which is why `builtin` showed up in `machine.resource_names`.

Reviewer: consider removing, the paragraph above does a good job of saying its built in, we could move the sentence explaining that builtin shows up in machine.resource_names but not in the config section in the paragraph above

> Before you turn `obj_in_world.pose` into a place to move the gripper, it matters exactly what `motion.move` moves. Two motions that sound similar are not the same thing:

Reviewer: might be good to intro the move method before this? Consider looking at **https://docs.viam.com/motion-planning/frame-system/end-effector-frames/#why-the-frame-you-name-matters** to see if you can steal anything to help (either images or text)

- The CONTROL tab's arm card, and a direct `Arm` method, move the arm's own end frame: the flange at the end of the last joint.

> - `motion.move(component_name="gripper-1", ...)` moves the `gripper-1` frame instead, the gripper's own tool center point (TCP), which sits further down the kinematic chain than the arm's end because the gripper is bolted on past it.

Reviewer: Consider showing the full code snippit here,

> Every offset you compute in this section is an offset from `obj_in_world.pose` to wherever you want the `gripper-1` frame to end up, not the arm's end. Keep that distinction in mind or the math below will not make sense.

Reviewer: offset is mentioned here, but it probably needs more context. What is offset used for, why and when? Would consider putting that as an intro section, possibly with the acsii table or graphic, and intro the 100mm here, then show the method and a simple pose before, call offset_pose and print example with the Z value shifted?

The workshop's `offset_pose` helper raises or lowers a pose in `z` while leaving `x`, `y`, and orientation untouched:

```python
def offset_pose(pose: Pose, z_offset_mm: float) -> Pose:
    """Raise or lower a pose in z while keeping x/y/orientation fixed."""
    return Pose(
        x=pose.x,
        y=pose.y,
        z=pose.z + z_offset_mm,
        o_x=pose.o_x,
        o_y=pose.o_y,
        o_z=pose.o_z,
        theta=pose.theta,
    )
```

The approach pose is a standoff directly above the block, high enough that the gripper can descend onto it without first colliding with it sideways. That offset is worked for you:

```python
approach_pose = offset_pose(obj_in_world.pose, APPROACH_MM)
```

`APPROACH_MM` is 100. Since every offset here is applied to `obj_in_world.pose`, which is the block's bounding-box center, this places the standoff 100 mm above the block center: enough clearance for the gripper to descend cleanly, with room to spare for a small pose error.

> Now compute the grasp pose yourself. What you actually want at the block is the gripper's fingers, not its TCP: the fingers have to close around the block. The `gripper-1` TCP frame sits one gripper-length above the fingertip contact point, so to put the fingers at the block center you place the TCP one gripper-length (`GRIPPER_LENGTH_MM`) above it. Remember that `motion.move` is already driving the gripper's own TCP, not the arm's end, so this is the only offset you add here. Work out the offset before reading on.

Reviewer: Might be good to use a diagram when talking about the location of the frames in the hand, "one gripper-length" is a bit confusing. "Remember that `motion.move` is already driving the gripper's own TCP" is also confusing.

The offset is `GRIPPER_LENGTH_MM`, the depth from the gripper's TCP down to its fingertip contact point:

```python
grasp_pose = offset_pose(obj_in_world.pose, GRIPPER_LENGTH_MM)
```

`GRIPPER_LENGTH_MM` is 60. If you used `APPROACH_MM` here by mistake, the gripper stops well above the block instead of at it; if you used zero, you would drive the TCP itself to the block center, sinking the fingers a full gripper-length past the block instead of closing them around it.

> ## Run the full pick loop

Reviewer: i think the above section is missing details on how to get the pose from the point cloud, explaining which poses should be offset and why. Mihght be good to have a few checkpoints for this to make sure the learner does each step?

<!-- ASSET P0 perception-pick (MOTION): full detect -> approach -> descend -> grab -> place cycle (milestone-two hero asset) -->

With `approach_pose` and `grasp_pose` computed, assemble the full cycle:

```python
await motion.move(
    component_name="gripper-1",
    destination=PoseInFrame(reference_frame="world", pose=approach_pose),
)
await gripper.open()
await motion.move(
    component_name="gripper-1",
    destination=PoseInFrame(reference_frame="world", pose=grasp_pose),
)
await gripper.grab()
await asyncio.sleep(0.3)  # finger gripper settle
await travel.set_position(2)
await place_pose.set_position(2)
await gripper.open()
await home.set_position(2)
```

> Notice the shape of this cycle: it picks with `motion.move` and places with the saved-pose switches from Phase 3. The pick target moves every cycle, so it needs the Cartesian precision and obstacle-aware planning that `motion.move` provides against a freshly computed world pose. The place target never moves: it is the same bin in the same spot every time, so a pre-measured, pre-verified saved pose is simpler and just as reliable as planning a fresh path there. Use the right tool for each half of the cycle rather than forcing one approach to do both jobs.

Reviewer: consider using more concise wording, don't use "shape of". so a pre-measured, pre-verified saved pose is simpler and just as reliable as planning a fresh path there. is a bit confusing, does that mean position saver switch doesn't use the motion planner? Consider removing "Use the right tool for each half of the cycle rather than forcing one approach to do both jobs."

{{< alert title="The arm moves under code control" color="caution" >}}
This loop drives the arm to a computed grasp pose with `motion.move` and replays saved poses, all from your script. Keep the workspace clear and the e-stop within reach, and run it the first few times ready to stop the arm if a computed pose looks wrong.
{{< /alert >}}

Run the script and watch the sequence in stages: the approach move first, then the grasp move, then the full cycle through to a placed block.

> {{< checkpoint >}}

Reviewer: consider spreading out the checkpoints with steps between

- **The pick point drifts from cycle to cycle, even for a block that has not moved.** This is almost always the wrist-camera rule again: some code path is detecting from a pose other than `home-pose`. Print `obj_in_world.pose` on every cycle and confirm the arm is fully settled at `home-pose` before each detection call.
- **Motion planning fails, or the target looks unreachable.** Open the **3D scene** tab during the failing move and look at where `approach_pose` or `grasp_pose` lands relative to the table and safety-wall geometry from Phase 3. A detected pose near a workspace boundary can place the standoff or the grasp point outside the region the planner is allowed to move through. If you skipped or under-measured the obstacle configuration in Phase 3, this is where it bites: geometry that does not match your physical setup makes the planner reject moves that are perfectly safe, or, worse, accept ones that are not. Revisit [Teach the planner about obstacles](/tutorials/pick-and-place/static-positions/#teach-the-planner-about-obstacles) and recheck your measurements before assuming the pose math is wrong.

> With a full perception-guided pick loop running end to end, you have every piece of the workshop's core loop working from your own computer: detection, the frame transform, planned motion, and a reliable place. The next phase picks up from here to package this same script as a module that runs on the robot directly, with no laptop connection required once it is deployed. If you are stopping here, the [wrap-up](/tutorials/pick-and-place/wrap-up/) reviews what you built and where to go next.

Reviewer: consider make "The next phase" a link to phase 6

---
title: "Phase 5: Perception-guided picking"
linkTitle: "5. Perception-guided picking"
type: "docs"
slug: "perception-guided-picking"
weight: 50
description: "Add the vision pipeline and write the perception loop that detects a block, transforms it to the world frame, and picks it with motion planning."
workshop: "pick-and-place"
toc_hide: true
phase: 5
phase_total: 6
time_estimate: "22 minutes"
prev: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/control-the-robot-from-python/"
next: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/inline-module/"
languages: ["python"]
---

In this phase you replace the fixed approach and grasp poses from Phase 4 with live perception: a vision service detects a block, the frame system transforms its position into world space, and the motion service plans a collision-free pick.

## Configure the vision pipeline

> On the **CONFIGURE** tab, click the **+** icon and select **Blocks**. Search for `shape-finder` and select the `devrel:shape-finder:detector` vision model. Name it `shape-detector` and set its attribute:

Reviewer: consider replacing the triplet with the ui module\model. Consider reviewing the other phases and flagging the same issue, exclude the examples that relate the tripplet to the underlying json

```json
{
  "camera_name": "cam-1"
}
```

> The `camera_name` attribute is also a dependency: `shape-detector` cannot run until `cam-1` is online, the same dependency pattern you have already seen with `gripper-1` and `arm-1`. This service reads color frames from `cam-1` and finds blocks by shape, in two dimensions, with no depth information yet.

Reviewer: consider splitting the json attributes and the model description. introducing the model in more detail might be appropriate here and could come first, consider explaining what it is before asking the learner to add it to the configuration.

<!-- ASSET P1 configure-vision-pipeline (UI): the shape-detector and vision-segment service configs -->

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/pick-and-place/configure-vision-pipeline.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="The shape-detector vision service config with its camera_name attribute.">}}

Add the second service the same way. Click the **+** icon and select **Blocks**, search for `detections-to-segments`, and select the `viam:vision:detections-to-segments` model. Name it `vision-segment` and set its attributes:

```json
{
  "detector_name": "shape-detector",
  "camera_name": "cam-1",
  "mean_k": 5,
  "sigma": 1.25
}
```

> `vision-segment` depends on `shape-detector` and `cam-1`, the same graph relationship as before: it takes each 2D shape detection, pulls the matching depth points from `cam-1`, filters noisy points out with the `mean_k` and `sigma` attributes, and fuses the result into a 3D object point cloud per detected block. A 2D detection alone cannot tell you how far away a block is or where it sits in space; `vision-segment` is what turns "a block-shaped region of pixels" into "a block at this point in three dimensions."

Reviewer: Consider starting with a 1000' view of what the service does, then describe it uses the camera for point cloud data and the shape detector service to segment the point cloud. consider moving this above the attributes, and have a second more detailed attribute paragraph below the attributes that explains the mean and sigma, consider adding an external link for more info on the approach.

Save the config and open the **CONTROL** tab. Find the `vision-segment` test card. You should see the detections coming from the `shape-detector` service and one or more segmented objects under the **Object point clouds** section after toggling **Show object point clouds**. Each segmented object is displayed as a small point cloud with a label matching the paired bounding-box detection, with estimated dimensions and 3D position from the perspective of the camera.

<!-- ASSET P0 control-vision-detections (UI+): CONTROL vision card showing detected blocks with boxes + labels. See plans/2026-07-02-pick-and-place-shot-list.md -->

> {{<imgproc src="/tutorials/pick-and-place/control-vision-detections.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="The shape-detector vision card showing a detected block with a bounding box and label.">}}

Reviewer: might be good to show the segmented pointcloud view as well if you already have the image, the shape detector test card could be its own sub heading to test out the shape detection, have learners check responsiveness and try adding a few blocks i the scene at once

{{< checkpoint >}}
The `vision-segment` test card returns at least one object when a block is in view. If it returns nothing, confirm a block actually sits in the camera's field of view, then check the `shape-detector` card on its own: if that also returns nothing, the problem is upstream in shape detection, not in the depth fusion step.
{{< /checkpoint >}}

> With the service live, go back to `starter-script.py` and uncomment the vision handle you commented out in Phase 4:

Reviewer: may need to be reworded based on changes in phase 4

```python
vision = VisionClient.from_robot(machine, "vision-segment")
```

## The frame system and transform_pose

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-frame-transform (DIAGRAM): block position in the cam-1 frame vs world, wrist camera on the arm -->

```text

> Frame tree (rooted at world):

Reviewer: It might be more clear to use an arm graphic instead of an ascii diagram

  transform_pose walks the frame tree above.
```

Every pose that `vision-segment` returns is expressed in the `cam-1` frame. That is the only frame the vision service knows about: it looked at pixels and depth values coming out of one camera, so the coordinates it hands back describe where a block sits relative to that camera's own origin and orientation.

The motion service does not think in camera coordinates. It plans in the `world` frame, the same frame your obstacle geometry in Phase 3 was defined against. To hand a detected pose to the motion service, you first have to express it in `world` instead of `cam-1`.

This is the frame system you already saw in Phase 2's 3D scene tab, when the `cam-1` frame visibly moved as you jogged joint 1. `viam-server` maintains that same relationship as a graph: the camera's offset from the wrist, the wrist's offset from the next joint, and so on, all the way down to the arm's base at the world origin. `RobotClient.transform_pose` walks that graph for you. Give it a pose tagged with its source reference frame and a destination frame, and it returns the equivalent pose in the destination frame:

```python

> obj_in_cam = PoseInFrame(reference_frame="cam-1", pose=geometry.center)

Reviewer: geometry.center is a little weird here, it might be good to use a simple offset translation like z=0.15 or something as the example, or consider adding a comment that says geometry is the detected object

obj_in_world = await machine.transform_pose(obj_in_cam, "world")
```

> `PoseInFrame` pairs a `Pose` with the name of the frame it is expressed in. `transform_pose` reads that source frame, reads the destination frame you passed as the second argument, and returns a new `PoseInFrame` with the same physical point re-expressed in `world` coordinates. You will wire this into the full detection code in the next section, once there is an actual `geometry.center` to transform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PoseInFrame` pairs a `Pose` with the name of the frame it is expressed in. `transform_pose` reads that source frame, reads the destination frame you passed as the second argument, and returns a new `PoseInFrame` with the same physical point re-expressed in the destination frame. The example above takes the detected objects pose in cam-1 frame and transforms it to world. You will wire this into the full detection code in the next section, once there is an actual `geometry.center` to transform.
```

## Detect from home (the wrist-camera rule)

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-detect-from-home (DIAGRAM): same block, two arm poses, two different world answers -->

```text

> One block, fixed on the table

Reviewer: the ASCII diagram is a little confusing, is this explaining the need for the home position because it gives a consistent place for block detection?

Reviewer: I think this diagram might still be confusing, maybe ask an intern if it clicks for them?

        │
        ├─ read from an unfixed / unknown arm pose
        │     cam-1 frame depends on the arm pose
        │     → transform_pose to world can differ each time   (unreliable)
        │
        └─ read from home-pose (a known position)
              cam-1 frame is in a known, repeatable place
              → transform_pose to world is consistent          (reliable)
```

> We can continue to use the `home-pose` saved position because it provides a good view of the workspace for the camera to detect objects to be picked up by the arm. We can update the control flow to replace the `approach` and `grasp` set positions with the perception logic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `home-pose` provides a good view of the workspace for the camera to detect objects to be picked up by the arm. Each pick and place cycle, the arm will move to the home pose and the shape-detector will look for known shapes. If the shape-detector has detections, it will provide them to the vision-segment service, which you can query using ` vision.get_object_point_clouds`. You will replace the static `approach` and `grasp` poses with poses derived from the point cloud segments. 
```

obj = max(objects, key=lambda o: len(o.point_cloud))
geometry = obj.geometries.geometries[0]
label = geometry.label
print(f"Detected: {label}")

# The object pose is in the camera frame; the planner needs world frame.
obj_in_cam = PoseInFrame(reference_frame="cam-1", pose=geometry.center)
obj_in_world = await machine.transform_pose(obj_in_cam, "world")
```

`get_object_point_clouds` returns one entry per object `vision-segment` fused together, each carrying its own point cloud and geometry. A workspace with several blocks in view returns several entries, so you need a rule for which one to pick this cycle. `max(objects, key=lambda o: len(o.point_cloud))` picks the object with the largest point cloud, ordinarily the block closest to the camera or most fully in view. Each `point_cloud` is the object's pointcloud data (PCD) stored as raw bytes, so `len(o.point_cloud)` measures its encoded size in bytes; that grows with the number of points, which makes it a reliable proxy for object size.

Add a `print(obj_in_world.pose)` after the transform and run the script. Watch the x, y, and z values it prints as you move a block around the table.

{{< checkpoint >}}

> `obj_in_world.pose` prints coordinates that make physical sense: a `z` roughly at the table surface plus the block's height, and `x`/`y` values that land somewhere over the table rather than off in empty space or underneath it. If the numbers look physically wrong, the most common cause is a detection that was not taken from `home-pose`. Confirm the guard clause runs before every `get_object_point_clouds` call.

Reviewer: what is a gaurd clause?

{{< /alert >}}

## Detect from home (the wrist-camera rule)

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-detect-from-home (DIAGRAM): same block, two arm poses, two different world answers -->

```text
One block, fixed on the table
        │
        ├─ read from an unfixed / unknown arm pose
        │     cam-1 frame depends on the arm pose
        │     → motion.move resolves cam-1 to a different spot each time  (unreliable)
        │
        └─ read from home-pose (a known position)
              cam-1 frame is in a known, repeatable place
              → motion.move resolves cam-1 the same way every time        (reliable)
```

The `home-pose` provides a good view of the workspace for the camera to detect objects to be picked up by the arm. Each pick-and-place cycle, the arm moves to the home pose and the `shape-detector` looks for known shapes. If it has detections, it provides them to the `vision-segment` service, which you query with `vision.get_object_point_clouds`. You replace the static `approach` and `grasp` poses with poses derived from the point cloud segments:

```python
# Observe from home so the wrist-mounted camera frame is in a known position.
await home.set_position(2)

> objects = await vision.get_object_point_clouds("cam-1")

Reviewer: the code snippits are slightlty different from the start-script.py (comments and CAMERA_NAME)
Its also not immediately clear which comments need to stay commented when uncommented, might be good to add a line break or block comments around comments that should stay.

Author: I'd like to keep the explicit string name here, just in case learners are not following along with the reference / starter script from the companion repo.

Add a `print(obj_in_cam.pose)` and run the script. Watch the x, y, and z values it prints as you move a block around the table.

{{< checkpoint >}}
`obj_in_cam.pose` prints coordinates in the camera's own frame: a `z` of roughly the camera-to-block distance, a few hundred millimeters, with small `x`/`y` values near the optical center. To check the detection against the workspace instead, use the `transform_pose` tip above to print the pose in `world`. If the numbers look wrong, the most common cause is a detection that was not taken from `home-pose`. Confirm the arm returns to `home-pose` (the `await home.set_position(2)` call) before every `get_object_point_clouds` call.
{{< /checkpoint >}}

## Compute the approach and grasp poses

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-approach-grasp-offsets (DIAGRAM): block center in cam-1; approach -100mm toward camera; grasp = gripper-1 TCP one gripper-length (-60mm) toward camera; gripper-1 TCP vs arm end -->

```text
Offsets applied to obj_in_cam.pose (the block center, in the cam-1 frame).
In the camera frame, +z points out of the lens into the scene, so moving
toward the camera, up and away from the block, is a negative z offset:

>   (toward the camera)  ▲  -z

Reviewer: this might work better as an iso diagram

The vision service hands you the block's center, `obj_in_cam.pose`, but that is not where you send the gripper: driving its TCP to the center would sink the fingers straight through the block. Instead you derive two targets from that center, a standoff to approach from and a grasp point where the fingers close, by shifting it along `z`. The workshop's `offset_pose` helper does exactly that, moving a pose in `z` while leaving `x`, `y`, and orientation untouched:

```python
def offset_pose(pose: Pose, z_offset_mm: float) -> Pose:
    """Raise or lower a pose in z while keeping x/y/orientation fixed."""
    return Pose(
        x=pose.x,
        y=pose.y,
        z=pose.z + z_offset_mm,
        o_x=pose.o_x,
        o_y=pose.o_y,
        o_z=pose.o_z,
        theta=pose.theta,
    )
```

Shifting a detected center toward the camera looks like this:

```python
# obj_in_cam.pose.z is the block center, say 387 mm from the camera

> standoff = offset_pose(obj_in_cam.pose, -50)

Reviewer: this looks like it moves the Z offset in camera frame, which should work well as long as it was done while camera and world are mostly aligned, might be worth converting to world first to help teach frames

Author: I'm avoiding converting to the world so that there's no dependency on the RobotClient in the module. I'll make sure this is a clear assumption that the camera and world are aligned.
